So this is Getting Started with
Safari on iPhone,
and my name is Vicki Murley, and I am the
Safari Technologies Evangelist at Apple.
And as John mentioned this morning,
I worked on the Safari engineering
team for the first version
of Safari on Mac OS X,
and then I also worked on
the first version of iPhone,
which came out last year.
But for the last year or so,
I've been working as an
evangelist on the evangelism team,
working with developers,
just like you guys,
to help them move their web
content to iPhone or to develop
full-fledged iPhone web applications.
So today's two sessions
are going to focus on,
you know,
getting started with Safari on iPhone.
If you're new to the platform
and have an existing site,
or are thinking about making
a full-fledged web app,
this is the session to be in.
And then later this afternoon,
we're going to talk about some
advanced topics and new technologies
that you can use in your web apps.
So in today's talk,
I'm going to cover five major areas.
First,
we're just gonna talk briefly about
kind of the impact and market trends
that we've seen with Safari on iPhone.
So maybe some of you are a
one-man shop or two-man operation,
and you're kind of wondering just how
many people are using Safari on iPhone.
Why is it compelling for me
to develop for this platform?
After that,
we're going to talk about Safari on
iPhone fundamentals-- kind of
how Safari on iPhone works,
how it does what it does.
After that, we're going to talk about
optimizing for Safari on iPhone.
This is a great section if you have an
existing website or existing web content,
and you just kind of want to make
a couple tweaks that will make
your site look great on the device
without breaking your existing site.
That is the section for you.
After that, we're going to get into
full-fledged web apps,
and specifically,
creating them through Dash Code,
which is an IDE on Mac OS X,
also used for developing
dashboard widgets.
And after that,
we're going to talk briefly about using
web content in native applications.
If you have a web app,
but you've decided that you want to add
a feature that is SDK-only right now,
such as location-based services,
you would need to make
a native application.
But there's ways that you can
leverage your existing web code
in that native application,
and I'm going to tell you how.
Okay, so getting started with kind
of the impact of Safari on
iPhone and some market trends.
So iPhone was released
on June 29th of 2007.
That's when it got into users'
hands for the first time.
And later that year,
it was named the "Invention
of the Year" by Time Magazine.
So this was very exciting
for lots of people at Apple,
including myself.
And really, you know,
this is pretty exciting because
iPhone really changed the way that
people interact with all different
types of media on mobile devices.
So it changed the way we look at photos,
changed the way we watch
YouTube videos on mobile devices.
I don't think I had
ever done that before,
prior to having an iPhone.
I probably haven't used a paper
map since I started using iPhone,
so it's changed the way
we use maps on the go.
It's changed the way we listen to music.
But more than anything,
it's really changed the way that people
browse the web on mobile devices.
And this is because Safari on iPhone
is the first browser on a mobile
device to really render desktop-quality
web content on a handheld handset.
So we're flipping through a few now.
We saw eBay, I think we saw the
New York Times in there as well,
and this had a pretty amazing impact,
specifically that more people were
browsing the web using Safari on iPhone,
using the iPhone OS,
than any other mobile operating
system in a very short period of time.
So if we look at the top three mobile
operating systems in November of '07,
and we look at-- we divide up
the market share that the top
three currently had at that time,
we can see that iPhone operating
system accounts for more than
half of that pool of people.
So more than all devices
running Windows CE,
and more than all people running a device
that has the Hip Top OS on it combined.
More people were using iPhone OS to
browse the web on mobile devices.
Over the next eight or nine months or so,
you know,
that number just continued to grow,
whereas the market share for other
mobile operating systems-- in this case,
we're looking at Windows CE--
just kind of stayed the same.
No new adopters, really.
So if all these facts and figures
aren't enough to make a compelling
argument to develop for iPhone,
there's one more great reason,
and that's because it's extremely easy.
The tips that we're going to go over
today are maybe one or two lines of HTML,
one or two lines of CSS,
and you're going to see it's very easy
to integrate some of these features
and technologies into your web content.
So when we talk about
web content on iPhone,
we kind of have three
levels of adherence.
The first is what we call
"compatible" with iPhone.
So this is looks as expected,
works as expected,
and many sites fall into this category.
eBay is a great example here.
The next level is optimized for iPhone.
These are people who have taken advantage
of some of the features on iPhone,
but still have a website.
They haven't made a
full-blown web app yet.
And then the last level of adherence
is full-blown iPhone web applications.
So these are web applications
that have a UI that is
specifically designed for iPhone.
They have a discrete purpose.
They're not, you know,
the full-fledged site.
And the Facebook web app is a great
example of an iPhone web application.
Okay, so talking about those, you know,
kind of three levels of adherence,
we're going to go through
Safari on iPhone fundamentals,
that kind of compatible category,
optimizing for Safari on iPhone,
and creating web apps in Dashcode.
So getting started with fundamentals,
the first thing we're going to do
is just take a look at a case study.
So this is the website KEXP.org.
It's a public radio website in Seattle.
Great radio station and great website,
but I noticed that there were
a few things that they could
have done differently to
look really great on iPhone.
So we're gonna use them
as our case study today.
So if we look at this page,
we can see that things look pretty good.
I see images, I see content.
It's laid out pretty much like
I would see it on a desktop browser.
So things are looking pretty good.
And that is because Safari on iPhone
is using the same rendering engine
to take care of all of the kind of
core web technologies that is used
in Safari on all other platforms.
So Safari is now shipping on Windows,
on Mac OS X,
and on iPhone and iPod Touch devices,
and all of those versions of Safari are
using the same underlying engine,
which is WebKit.
So as I mentioned,
WebKit is responsible for
kind of core web technologies,
so things like parsing
and rendering HTML,
rendering CSS styles,
executing JavaScript.
WebKit takes care of all of that.
And that's why you're able to see this
kind of desktop-caliber web content
on a mobile device because of WebKit.
WebKit is also the name
of an open-source project,
besides being the name of this engine
that supports Safari on all platforms.
And this is great for you guys.
So WebKit was originally based off of
another open-source project named KHTML,
and then eventually,
WebKit branched far enough that
Apple-- the folks who were working on
WebKit at Apple decided to make their
own open-source project in 2005.
And this is great for anyone developing
for WebKit or a WebKit-based browser,
because we have many eyes on the engine,
you know, many bugs getting fixed,
many bugs being reported.
But also,
by virtue of being an open-source
project and by being a kind of
small and highly portable code base,
WebKit is showing up in all different
kinds of applications and on all
different kinds of platforms.
So for example,
you may not know that WebKit is
the basis for the OmniWeb browser,
and it's also the basis for
the new Google Chrome browser.
Both of these web browsers use WebKit.
As I mentioned, WebKit is highly portable
to other platforms.
It's small and compact.
So WebKit was used as the basis for the
web browser on Nokia E60 series phones,
and it's also used by the
Open Handset Alliance.
So this is great for you guys,
because for web developers,
compatibility is king, you know?
So if you're working with the same
engine in many different browsers,
that's great for you.
Another thing that is great for you guys
is that one of the tenets of WebKit is
really standards-based compatibility.
So when the folks at Apple who are
working at WebKit and the folks across
the world who are working at WebKit look
for new features to implement,
instead of kind of reinventing the wheel
every time we have a newfangled idea,
we look to the developing web
standards for what's there,
what's going to be implemented
in every browser in the future.
That's what we look to first.
We're going to talk later this
afternoon about some really exciting
stuff that's in upcoming web standards
like offline web applications,
database storage, stuff like that.
Those are the things that we
choose to implement in Safari.
And as I think I mentioned,
that's great for you guys
because even if it's only
implemented in Safari right now,
by virtue of being part of a standard,
it's going to be implemented in
many other browsers in the future.
So you're going to be kind of ahead
of the curve by adopting early.
Thank you.
Okay,
so going back to our case study here,
kexp.org,
we mentioned this site is looking
pretty good because it's using
this very powerful rendering
engine that's also used on the
desktop to render this content.
But if I zoom in on the
upper left-hand corner,
I see that there are two
broken plug-in icons here.
So plug-ins are not supported
in Safari on iPhone at all.
So you have to come up with
some way to work around this.
And the best thing to do is really
to provide a fallback content.
So in order to do that,
the first thing I did in my exercise
here was I took a look at what the
appearance was in a desktop browser--
a browser that supported plug-ins.
So there was this kind of
animated icon at the top,
and then there was some text
scrolling across that "Now Playing"
area that was showing me the name
of the artist and the current song
that the radio station's playing.
So I'm really looking to
provide fallback behavior here.
You know, maybe I don't have
exactly the same thing,
but the key word here, as I said,
is "fallback." So for that kind
of animated image at the top,
you know, the easiest thing for me to do,
is to probably just take a still
image of that logo and specify that
image inside my object tag here.
So then,
browsers that don't support plug-ins,
instead of having the
broken plug-in icon,
they will just render this image instead.
So that is a super simple way
to provide fallback content.
For the text that is scrolling down
here in the "Now Playing" area,
we could have really used just straight
web technology to do the same thing.
So a combination of set interval,
XMLHTP request, and either JavaScript or
CSS animation to kind of move that
text across that area there would
have achieved the same effect,
and we wouldn't have had to
resort to using a plugin.
So use straight web
technologies wherever possible.
Okay, so that covers Safari on
iPhone fundamentals.
Now, we're going to talk about
optimizing for Safari on iPhone.
So this is kind of if you
have an existing website,
you're new to the platform,
you want to make a couple tweaks so
that your site looks great on iPhone,
but still displays well
in desktop browsers.
So back again to our case study here,
if I look at the right-hand
side of the screen here,
I see this large area of white space.
And that is not great
because the iPhone screen,
while large for a mobile device,
is still relatively small.
So we want to be kind of utilizing all
of the available screen real estate.
What's happening here,
we're going from a desktop-based browser,
very large screen,
down to the smaller screen.
We have to find a way to render the
content that we would be able to make
very large on a very compact device.
So the way that we do that
behind the scenes is we take
the window size of the browser,
and we assume a width of 980 pixels,
okay?
And then we scale that down and
we assume a width of 980 pixels,
okay?
And then we scale that down to the
width that is appropriate for iPhone,
which is 320 pixels.
So in the case of kexp.org, this website,
the web content is actually
only 720 pixels wide.
So you can see the content
is 720 pixels wide.
We're assuming 980.
That's what's making that white
space on the right-hand side for us.
And then we're scaling it down to 320,
and the white space remains.
So luckily, there's a very easy
way to deal with this,
and that is by customizing
what's called the viewport.
So it's easy to do.
You just specify a meta tag,
and for web sites,
we recommend that you specify
the page content width.
So I mentioned that the
width of the content here,
these columns of text and images,
is really only 720 pixels.
So I could add this tag to my web
content-- meta name equals "viewport."
The content equals "width" is 720.
And that's going to take us from a layout
that looks like this with this empty
white space to one that looks like this.
No white space at all
on the right-hand side.
And that's what we want.
This meta tag is gonna be ignored in
browsers that don't understand it.
So any desktop browser that doesn't have
this tag implemented-- I don't know of
one that does-- will just ignore it,
and your content will be
unaltered in any other browser.
So if you have an iPhone or
iPod Touch web application,
we recommend that you use a
constant here for the width value,
and that constant is
width equals device width.
Okay, so we mentioned, you know,
one of the most useful
values for a viewport here,
the width, you know,
but there are a couple
other ones as well.
So they are width, height, initial scale.
You know, we mentioned we're scaling
down from 980 pixels to 320.
You can set all of these values
in the viewport tag besides
being able to set the width.
The important thing to remember here
is that if you set one of these values,
the other values are calculated for you.
So we set the width to be 720,
and the height was calculated for us,
and the initial scale
was calculated for us.
Other values that you can set in the
Viewport tag include the minimum and
maximum scale-- how far a user can
zoom in or zoom out on your webpage.
And also,
you can disable scaling altogether
on a webpage by setting this
value "user scalable" to "no."
And that's very useful if you have
a full-fledged web application.
Like, most web apps that you see on
iPhone don't allow scaling,
they just want you to
be in this one view.
So that's how you would disable that.
So we've talked a little bit about
how things look on iPhone right now,
and now we're going to talk
about how people interact
with web content on iPhone.
So the first thing I wanna mention
is interacting with input fields.
I notice this all the time.
When I am logging into a website
or updating my Facebook status,
for instance,
I actually don't want my text
to be automatically capitalized
and if I'm entering a password,
I don't want my text
to be auto-corrected.
I don't want that pop-up bubble
to show up and then I have to
dismiss it and I've lost my place
and I'm just totally confused.
So luckily,
there's an easy way to disable the
default sort of keyboard behavior
in text areas in your web pages.
And that's through two attributes
here-- auto-correct and auto-capitalize.
Of course,
auto-correct-- it handles whether
or not words are automatically
corrected for you and auto-capitalize
deals with capitalization.
And if you set both of those to "off,"
both of those features are disabled.
So as I mentioned,
very useful for username and password
fields in your web applications
and web content in general.
And of course, if a web browser doesn't
understand these attributes,
it will just ignore them and your
content will continue to look
great in a desktop browser that
doesn't implement these attributes.
Okay, talking some more about how people
interact with content on iPhone.
Another thing to think
about is double tap.
We have this desktop caliber web
content on this very small screen.
So a way that people interact with it,
I'm sure you all have done this,
is to double tap on a given
area of the screen to zoom in.
So what's actually happening here
is iPhone is detecting where the
touch has happened and finding the
closest logical block of web content
and then zooming into that block.
So by a block,
I mean like a paragraph or a div or
what's called a replaced element,
like an image or a video,
where the dimensions of that media
define the dimensions of the block.
So here, I've highlighted a couple
blocks on this page.
If I double tap in on this image here,
it looks pretty good.
I see, you know,
the text and the image looks good.
Here's this menu that was on the
upper left-hand part of the screen.
And here, I've double-tapped on the
center area of the page.
So this is arguably, you know,
the most important part of the webpage.
It's kind of telling me what's new,
what's next.
And I can barely read this text.
I can barely make it out.
So that's not good.
There's a way-- lucky for
you-- there's a way that you
can customize this for iPhone,
and that is just through
this CSS property,
"Webkit Text Size Adjust." So here,
on the left,
we have set it to "Auto"-- or it's
set to "Auto," which is the default.
And we see the view that we
saw on the previous slide.
And on the right,
we've scaled the text up by 220%. So now,
I can, you know,
read this text with no problem at all.
And it looks great.
One thing to keep in mind when you
are using "Webkit Text Size Adjust"
is to make sure that it kind of jives
with the rest of the CSS on your site,
particularly line height.
You want to use a relative line height,
a multiplier like 1.2 or
1.5 or something like that,
as opposed to using kind
of an absolute line height,
because the line height is going to be
calculated off of the adjusted text size
if you're using a relative line height.
So if I have adjusted the text up
by 220%, but my line height is,
you know, 20 pixels or something,
you could end up with a scenario where
you have text overlapping vertically,
and that's not what you want.
So make sure to use a relative line
height if you're using the CSS property.
More about tap behavior.
So, if anyone has ever touched
and held on a link,
you have seen this little bubble pop up,
and this is what we call the "callout
bubble." And this is really designed
to provide users with additional
information when they are on your site.
You know, in this case,
we can read the text, but you know,
in many cases,
the text might be too small to read,
even after they've double-tapped in.
So the call out bubble
provides additional info.
The point here is to actually provide
useful information in this callout,
like the info.
"Click here," I already
know that this is a link,
it's colored like a link.
This bubble has popped up.
"Click here" is not the most useful
phrase to have in the bubble here.
So the title is actually defined-- the
title meaning the first line of the
callout bubble is actually defined by
the text that's inside the anchor tag,
and then the subtitle on this
bubble is defined by the href
attribute within that tag.
So we can't really allow customization
on this bubble because that would be
kind of a security risk for users.
Imagine I tell you I am paypal.com,
but then you touch the link and
I direct you to my malicious site and
take all of your username and password
info and then take all your money.
That would be bad.
So we don't allow
customization on this bubble,
but we do allow you to disable it.
If it's getting in the way,
especially if you have a web application,
you might want to disable it if
it's not doing the behavior that you
think your users would expect to see.
So you can disable this callout
with just one line of CSS,
and that's "webkit touch callout = none."
thing that you can do
with the tap behavior,
which is kind of neat to do
in your existing web content,
and also very useful if
you're doing a web app,
is to customize the
highlight color on links.
So the default highlight color
is just this ugly gray color,
but here I've customized it to be this
kind of orange color that fits in with
the rest of the color scheme of my app.
And I've done that with
just a line of CSS.
There's a theme here.
It's WebKit Tap Highlight Color,
and you specify an RGBA value here.
I have this orange color,
and I also have an opacity
that's about 40-- that is 40%.
The last thing I want to talk about in
terms of optimization is optimizing the
page load time for your application,
optimizing performance.
So the main thing that you're going
to run into a mobile device is
network latency on cellular networks.
So by latency,
I mean the time it takes for a
packet to go from your device
to the server and back again,
as opposed to bandwidth,
which is kind of throughput.
You know,
of the pipe-- the size of the pipe.
So latency is round-trip time,
and on Wi-Fi networks,
latency is relatively low.
It's about 100 milliseconds.
So pretty low.
But on cellular networks,
cell networks have
inherently high latency,
about 500 milliseconds.
So you can see that, you know,
if you have a lot of resources
that you're requesting,
and if they are loaded,
not in parallel-- if you're
waiting for one to finish loading
before you can load another one,
you can see that those, you know,
500 milliseconds are going
to add up really quickly,
and your page is going
to load very slowly.
So we actually did a real-world
test of two websites.
We happened to choose
apple.com versus microsoft.com.
And you can see the total amount of
resources on apple.com is greater
than that number on microsoft.com.
So we're looking at 610K versus 494K.
So we have a larger amount
of resources on apple.com.
If we look at the number of resources,
though, you know,
apple.com has almost half the
number that Microsoft.com has.
We are looking at 31 versus 55.
And what that really means is we
have fewer large resources-- fewer
larger resources on apple.com,
and more smaller resources
on microsoft.com.
So the average bytes per
resource on apple.com are 20K,
and on Microsoft.com, much smaller, 9K.
So when we loaded these two pages,
both over Edge and 3G,
the result was that Apple.com loaded two
to three times faster than Microsoft.com.
You know,
even though the site was bigger,
you know, in terms of total size,
that fewer number of resources,
minimizing the number of resources,
really caused this site
to load much faster.
So there are a couple suggestions
that I can give you for minimizing
the number of resources.
The first is to use this
technique called image spriting.
Many of you have probably
heard of it before,
but for those of you who haven't,
this is a technique where you
use CSS background images,
CSS positioning,
and the element size to use
really a single image for
multiple items on the page.
So let's take a look at an example here.
I went to this page,
apple.com/iphone/softwareupdate,
and there was this menu bar at the top
that's divided into eight sections,
and the iPhone section is this darker
gray because I'm on an iPhone page,
so that's like the primary highlight.
And then,
I moved my mouse over the Store button,
and that turned kind of a medium
gray color when I moused over.
So you may think, "Okay,
we have these eight images here.
"And then, you know, six of those,
"maybe we have to duplicate for
the medium gray "and the primary
dark gray highlight color."
So that's adding up pretty quickly.
We're about at 20 images by now.
But really,
if we take a look at the resources
for this page-- I looked at it in the
Web Inspector-- I noticed that this was
really one image on this page that was
accounting for all of these menu items,
both the very lightest gray color,
the dark gray highlight color,
and there were actually two
highlight colors in between.
One of them I didn't run across.
But we're using one image for all
of these menu items on the page,
just positioning it in
different ways using CSS.
So we've gone down
from 26 resources here,
maybe more, down to one.
So that's how image sprites work.
The next thing you can do is really
combine and compress your resource files,
like JavaScript and CSS.
So it's really not practical during
your development to work with,
like, one large JavaScript file.
I don't know anyone who would do that.
Or one large CSS file.
But you can kind of make a script that
concatenates those files and then,
you know, modifies the files that link to
them on the fly when you're ready
to kind of deploy your site.
There are also some compressors
out there that do a great job of,
you know, not only compressing your
files and making them smaller,
but some of them also will do
that concatenation for you.
So...
Another thing that you can do to optimize
for cellular network page load time is
to improve your loading parallelism.
I mentioned earlier,
latency on cell networks
is 500 milliseconds,
and if you're waiting on one
resource to load before you
start loading another one,
before you start loading another one,
those little hunks of 500 milliseconds
are going to add up quickly.
So you're better off making sure
that you have as many resources
floating at one time as possible.
So one way to kind of examine the
behavior of your page load is in this
view in Safari and WebKit Nightly builds.
In the Web Inspector,
if I click on the Resources tab,
I'm taken to this Network Timeline view.
And not only does it show me
how much the amount of space I'm
using for things like documents,
stylesheets, images, scripts, et cetera,
I can also sort by start time here by
using this little menu at the bottom,
and that's showing me the order in
which all of my resources are loading,
which ones are loading at the same time,
et cetera.
So very valuable.
One thing to mention here is that
the bars that you see-- the light
part of the bar is-- the beginning
is you have requested the resource,
and the end of that light bar is the
resource has actually started loading.
So the dark area of the bar
is actual resource load time,
and the light part is the request for
the resource to the start of load,
that amount of time.
So as I mentioned,
this tool is available in Safari,
and it's also part of WebKit,
so you can get the latest version of
this tool by downloading a Knightly
WebKit build at knightly.webkit.org.
So you may be thinking, "Well,
that tool looks great, "but, you know,
it's only available on the desktop,
"and I care about
cellular networks." Well,
luckily,
there's a way that you can simulate
network latency on the desktop.
And it's just a command line tool, IPFW,
make yourself the
pseudo user in terminal,
IPFW, add pipe 1,
the source port is HTTP,
configure the delay in
the second command there.
And that's gonna give you a pretty
good approximation of cellular
network latency on a desktop machine.
So you can use that for testing
when you're ready to go back to
your super-fast Wi-Fi connection.
Just execute this command, ipfw flush,
to clear those settings.
So we have optimized our KEXP site
and we have gone from this layout
that you see here to one that
looks like this one on the right.
So some of the changes are subtle,
but now this site doesn't
have broken plug-in icons.
It's using all the available
screen real estate.
I can see the primary text that's
telling me the main info about the page.
And it looks great.
So just to kind of recap
the things that we did,
we defined a viewport to
maximize the screen real estate.
We customized for the touch interface.
We optimized performance,
primarily by minimizing
the number of resources.
And one more thing I just
want to mention again,
even though it falls more under
compatibility than optimization,
we provided fallback
content for plug-ins.
Plug-ins are not supported
in Safari on iPhone.
Okay, so that covers optimization,
and now we're going to
move on to full-fledged web
applications in Safari on iPhone.
So iPhone web applications
are different from,
you know, just websites in that they
have a few key characteristics.
The first is that they often
look like a native application.
Lots of times,
you'll see web apps kind of emulating
that sliding browser view or the flip
transition that you see in native apps.
So they often look native,
or at least have UI that
is customized for iPhone.
Secondly, the best ones feel built-in.
You know, when you touch on a menu item,
you don't see the whole page reload,
and it's a cue to the user that
you're definitely in a web browser.
The best iPhone web
applications feel built-in.
They've built-in, like,
a sliding transition or something else
to avoid that page reload kind of effect.
Links don't feel like links,
they feel like menu items.
And lastly, they often provide
discrete functionality.
So, you know,
you may have a huge website,
but it's up to you to decide, you know,
what the most important things
are for users on the go.
You know,
the typical way that people use iPhones,
with the exception of games, of course,
is, you know, they pull them out,
do a couple things,
they want the key information
right there at their fingertips.
It's true of native apps,
and it's also true of web applications.
Okay, so one example of a web
app on iPhone is Fandango.
They actually have two versions
available to their users.
They have their full-blown website here,
which looks good,
and I'm able to interact with it.
You know, I double-- I tap in on that
text field near the top,
and I can enter my zip code,
and see some movies, and it's great.
But they also have an
iPhone web application,
and that looks like this.
So this web app,
it looks pretty good right now.
You know, it has this set of menu items
that we're used to seeing in
lots of iPhone applications,
but when I touch on one of
these items in the list,
the experience kind of
starts to degrade a bit.
Like, the whole page reloads.
It's obvious to me that I'm using,
you know,
a web application at that point.
So if you're looking to develop
an app like this one that kind
of emulates the look and feel
of some of the built-in apps,
there's a great tool
that's available to you,
and that tool is DashCode.
DashCode has a bunch of advantages.
We're gonna go through a
little demo walk-through here,
but first,
I wanna just give you a quick overview.
So one of the biggest advantages are
these prepackaged interface elements.
So you can basically drag and
drop these elements onto your UI,
and the CSS and HTML is generated
for you behind the scenes.
So this is extremely valuable.
You know, a year ago,
we were doing these Tech Talks,
and there was no SDK,
so we were talking all about web apps.
There was also no DashCode for
iPhone web apps at that time.
This came out along with
the SDK earlier this year.
So we were having to
describe to people exactly,
you know, "Okay, well,
if you want a back button "that looks
like one of the built-in back buttons,
"it has to have this font,
"and the font should be this size,
and this color,
"and the background should be this color,
"and here's how you do the gradient,
"and here's the JavaScript that
you should attach to it." You know,
that's really a lot of code to
write for your user interface.
So with DashCode,
all of that is done for you.
So it takes a huge step,
right out of the box,
right out of the process,
and lets you kind of focus, you know,
on your web app, on the functionality.
So besides just looking great, you know,
the functionality is also built
in to these prepackaged elements.
So here we have a list part.
Another very popular one
is this browser part.
And the functionality here kind of,
you know, you touch one of these menu
items and detail view slides in,
and that functionality is built in.
So the point is, you know,
these elements look great,
but they also function just
as you would expect as well.
Another advantage of Dash code
is that when you're building
a web app in Dash code,
you're building an
Ajax-based application.
So we all probably know what Ajax is,
but I will mention it anyway.
It allows you to fetch content
asynchronously and then
modify your page-- the DOM of
your page-- dynamically.
So you're pulling less data
across the wire because you're
just pulling little pieces that
you need to update on the page.
So your app is going
to be more responsive.
Also since you're just
updating parts of the page,
you can avoid those kind of ugly
and obvious page reloads that you
see in a web browser all the time.
You're making a web app, not a website.
So you want to kind of
avoid those page reloads,
and by using Ajax,
you can build in some great transitions
between views instead of having
your whole view wiped out when a
user is using touches the menu item.
I think this is the last
advantage that I want to mention,
and that's that Dashcode also
builds applications that follow
the model-view-controller paradigm.
And that really just means that you have,
kind of,
three layers to your application.
So this is a very common paradigm
in native desktop programming.
In Dashcode,
the view is basically your HTML and CSS.
That's kind of your UI.
The model is your JavaScript objects,
handles all of your data.
And the layer between those two layers,
the-- you know,
how they talk to each other,
the controller, that's really just
JavaScript in a web application.
So the big advantage here is, you know,
I may have a web app, I've put it out,
I've released it, everyone loves it.
Six months later, I decide I want to
revise the way it looks.
You know, same functionality,
but I want it to look different.
Well, I can just rewrite that view layer,
rewrite my HTML and CSS,
but reuse the controller
and model layers,
which saves me, you know,
two-thirds of my development time,
which is great.
So I'm going to go through a
little quick tutorial here to
kind of show you around Dash Code.
But while I'm doing that,
I want to give you an
overview of the workflow.
So the first thing that people do
when they use Dash Code is they
use those prepackaged elements
to make up their interface.
The next thing they do is they kind of
modify that interface via these different
inspectors that I'm going to show you.
And lastly, people edit code directly.
You know, because you're working with a
GUI tool to lay out your UI,
you're dealing with code
generation on the backend.
And while that code
generation is extremely clean,
you know, in some cases,
it can overwrite manual changes
that you might make to those files.
So it's best to really just
leave that step till the end.
Okay.
I'm just going to start by launching
Dashcode from the dock here.
And when I do that, I am presented with
this panel of templates.
And I mentioned earlier that
Dash Code was originally
created for dashboard widgets,
so there's a bunch of templates
there for widgets on Mac OS X.
But the functionality that was added
back when the SDK was released were these
templates for iPhone web applications.
So this one, custom,
it's pretty much just like a blank slate.
You can drag whatever
UI elements you want onto it.
It's just your kind of
GUI interface to get started.
These last two, RSS and podcast,
all that these strictly
require are like a data URL,
either for the RSS feed or the podcast.
Of course,
you can customize the UI as you like,
but most of the functionality is already
built in for you for these two templates.
And then the middle two templates
are browser and utility.
So browser is the one that we saw
on a slide earlier that has the kind
of sliding panels that we're used to
seeing on iPhone built-in applications.
And utility allows you to
create the type of app,
like weather or stocks,
that has a front side with information
and then you flip to the back
side and you have your settings.
So I'm going to choose utility.
And when I do that,
here's what I get in Dashcode.
So, this main area here is
what's called the canvas,
and this is where you
kind of build your UI,
where the UI is shown.
If I go over here in
the upper left corner,
this is what is called the Navigator.
And this Navigator really reflects
the DOM structure of your HTML.
So I can click through,
And as I select different
items in this navigator list,
you can see that the corresponding
item is selected in my Canvas view,
the GUI area here.
Here's the backside setting,
there's my header, this group,
the reset button, etc.
On the bottom left-hand corner
is this set of steps that
every template comes with.
So they're not strictly required,
but they're a great way to
kind of get started with a
template and kind of learn,
you know, how to approach things.
So that's great.
There is also at the bottom
here an integrated code view.
If you've ever used, you know,
Xcode or other text editors on Mac OS X,
you're used to seeing this file switcher.
And here we have, you know,
all of the code for our project.
So here's a look at the CSS.
You can see it looks really good,
very clean.
And that's where you're
going to edit code directly.
There is also an Inspector panel,
similar to, you know,
every inspector that you've ever seen
for every application on Mac OS X.
And this is what you use to
kind of customize the elements
in your Canvas view here.
So I have, you know,
this sticky note selected,
and if I wanna change
the background color,
I can do that right
here in the Inspector,
and that generates the CSS for
me behind the scenes to
change that background color.
Of course, you can customize other
things like the size,
position, the font of the text,
the color of the text, et cetera.
We won't walk through
all of them right now,
but it's all there for you to explore.
There is also a library,
and this is where you find those
pre-packaged interface elements
that I've mentioned a few times.
What's also nice is if-- I probably
would not want to add a back
button to this application,
because it's a utility app that's
gonna flip to the other side,
but if I did want to add it,
these guides would show up
to tell me exactly where,
you know,
the right place is to drop that button.
So, I know-- you know,
I don't have to guess on how to make
this look and feel like a built-in app.
Also in the library view are some
code snippets for just commonly used
operations that you might need to
interact with the prepackaged parts.
So get this indicator value,
get this gauge value, etc.
All of these code snippets
are here for you to use.
So now, you know,
that's a brief overview of
the UI and how it works,
and now I'm just going to go ahead,
and I'm gonna click "Run"
to see what happens.
And the iPhone simulator
is going to launch,
and it's going to load my app.
The last time I loaded it,
I set the color to green,
so I'm going to reset it to black.
And click done.
And so this is looking a lot like
a built-in iPhone application.
I can also click pause here in the main
view and you see this message come up,
pausing at the next opportunity.
So I'll have to do something over here.
And now we've paused and this canvas
area has been replaced by all of my
local variables and down here in the
code view the current line of code
that's being executed is highlighted.
So this is great not only to debug
the functionality of your app,
but also to kind of get a
closer look at how the default
templates are doing what they do,
so maybe you wanna build a flip
transition into your existing web app.
Working with the debugger and the default
templates is a great way to get insight
into how that functionality works.
Okay, so I'm going to click continue.
And then another thing
I wanted to show you today,
oh, I'll have to click run again, sorry.
Uh, is that there's a new
feature in iPhone OS,
uh, 2.1, actually.
Some people haven't
quite discovered it yet,
so I'm gonna mention it here.
Um, I can add this to my home screen.
and then, whenever I launch it
from the home screen,
it's running in what we
call full screen mode.
So the Safari UI elements, you know,
it's still a web app,
but you no longer see the URL field
or the Safari buttons at the bottom
that are like back and forward,
and you know, the bookmarks or whatever.
And now, this looks, you know,
even more like a built-in application.
So this is a feature that's new in 2.1,
and we're going to go over
all the specifics of the
code later this afternoon,
how to achieve this effect.
But right now, I just wanted to mention,
you know,
it's also just a checkbox to enable
this feature here in Dashcode.
Under "Application Attributes"
on the left-hand column,
if we look under "Web Clip," we see
a checkbox for full screen mode.
So just check that, and then,
every time a user launches your web
application from the home screen icon,
they'll be running in
this full screen mode,
and your web app is going to, you know,
look and feel even more
like a built-in app.
The last thing about dashcode
that I want to mention is
that they are easy to deploy.
You know,
you can add a web server to deploy to.
You can also deploy, you know,
directly to your mobile me account.
And I've actually deployed just the
browser template and this utility
template to my mobile me account.
And I'll have those URLs up at the end
of this session so that you can see,
you know, how these templates
behave on a real device.
You know,
we're looking on a laptop right now.
So I'll have those up at
the end of the session.
Okay.
So that's it for Dashcode.
I think you can see it's a
way to get up and running,
you know, with a web app that's really,
really quickly,
especially if you want it to kind of,
you know,
emulate the look and feel of some
of the built-in apps on iPhone.
So the last thing we're going
to talk about today is web
content in native applications.
So I mentioned this in the beginning.
If you have an app, a web app,
and you decide that you want
to have or utilize a feature
that's SDK only right now.
So some of those include
location-based services,
accelerometer data,
accessing built-in contacts.
Those are all features that you can
only utilize from the SDK right now.
So you would have to build
a native application.
But it's easy to kind of leverage
your existing web code in the
interface for that application by
using this view called UI WebView.
So all of the technologies that you would
expect to be supported in a web view are,
of course, supported-- so HTML, CSS,
and JavaScript.
These other document types that you
can view from within Safari on iPhone,
like PDF, Iwork, and Office documents,
and also SVG and Style Text,
just to name a few of the
supported technologies.
Also worth mentioning--
you can load-- of course,
load content from an
HTTP URL over the wire,
but you can also load content
locally from your application bundle.
So maybe, you know,
you have an index.html file,
it's not gonna change for a while,
or maybe some CSS.
You don't have to load
that over the wire.
You can put it in your
application bundle and load it,
you know, on the fly when your
application launches.
One thing I want to mention here,
you know, iPhone SDK has been out
for six months now or so,
and we have a full-fledged
SDK on the desktop,
WebKit SDK, that is, you know,
has a wealth of functionality.
You could use it to make a
full-fledged web browser,
if you like.
This is not exactly equivalent
to UI WebView on iPhone.
You know, UI WebView, for now,
is primarily... its primary
purpose is to display web content.
So these two are not designed
to be equal right now,
but that said, there's a lot that you
can do with UI WebView,
especially in terms of kind of
bridging your web code to the
native code of your application.
So there's two directions on that bridge.
The first is executing
JavaScript from native code,
and the second is the other direction,
calling native code from JavaScript.
And we're going to go over how
to do both of these things.
So starting off,
executing JavaScript from native code.
This part is really straightforward.
You create a string-- this
is in your native code.
You make a string of JavaScript.
Here, I've made one with using
a string with string.
And I've created a string of
JavaScript that is "window.alert wow."
Next, I'm going to just pass this to
the method "string by evaluating
JavaScript from string," and
that will execute my JavaScript.
One thing to mention,
you should wait until the content
of your UI WebView has fully loaded.
So there's a callback available
that you can listen for,
and when you get that callback,
WebView did finish load,
you'll know that, you know,
content has fully loaded,
and it's now safe to execute JavaScript.
Another direction on that bridge between
your web code and the native code is
executing native code from JavaScript.
So, there are kind of three pieces
of the puzzle here that you need
to be aware of to make this work.
The first is-- the first piece that you
need to know about is that you can define
a custom URL scheme for your application.
So URL schemes that we're all used
to seeing are things like HTTP,
Tel Links, FTP.
Those are all URL schemes
that we're used to seeing.
But you can create your own
URL scheme for your application.
So here, I've created my URL scheme.
It's my app.
The second piece of the puzzle is to
know that every time a load is initiated,
there's a callback,
and that is "Should start
load with request." Okay?
And in that callback,
you can look at the scheme of
the URL for my application.
Is it equal to my app?
Okay,
so that's the second piece of the puzzle.
The last piece is your HTML.
So we mentioned that
"shouldStartLoadWithRequest,"
that's a callback that fires
every time a load is initiated.
Well, you can initiate a load by setting
"window.location" to a URL that is equal
to the URL scheme for your application.
So what's going to happen here is
a user clicks on whatever element
has this onclick attached to it.
So they click on this element.
A load request is initiated,
so this callback fires.
And then, in that method,
you look to see if the URL scheme is
equal to the scheme for your application.
If it is, maybe you want to do
something interesting,
take a picture, get the location,
whatever, and then return "no" so
that the load is abandoned.
And if it's not your URL scheme,
you just return "yes," and if
it's an HTTP request or whatever,
that request goes through,
the content loads,
and everything is great.
So this is, you know,
kind of the three pieces of the puzzle,
executing native code from JavaScript.
Okay, so that really covers all that
I wanted to talk about today.
We talked a little bit about how
Safari on iPhone has changed the way
people browse the web on mobile devices.
We went over how Safari on
iPhone does what it does,
and how you can utilize
that in your web content.
We talked about optimizing
for Safari on iPhone,
how to-- you know,
if you have an existing site,
and you wanna make just a couple tweaks,
and, you know,
have those-- have that degrade
gracefully in desktop browsers,
we went over some tips
that you could follow.
We took a look at creating
web apps in Dash code,
how to get up and running quickly
with a web app that looks and
feels like a built-in application.
And the last piece that we
covered was integrating web
content into native applications.
So if you wanna integrate with a
feature that's SDK-only right now,
you'd have to make a native app,
and we talked about how to do
that and how to bridge your
web code with your native code.
So coming up this afternoon,
we're going to go in-depth on
some of the latest and greatest
web technologies available.
So we're going to talk about
CSS transforms and animations.
This is a way to add hardware
accelerated animations to your
web applications-- very exciting.
We're also going to talk about what
we call DOM touch and gesture events.
This is like multi-touch
through JavaScript.
So in native apps,
you can define your own gesture,
detector rotation, et cetera.
You can also do that
through JavaScript now.
We're gonna go over that.
We're going to talk, lastly,
about local data storage.
So storing structured data in
SQLite databases and also creating
a version of your web application
that fully functions offline.
We're gonna cover both of those
topics in terms of local data storage.
So here's my name and contact info,
vicki@apple.com.
And then,
I have a couple titles of documents that
I think would be useful for you guys.
And they're all linked from
developer.apple.com/webapps.
So the URLs here are really long.
The best thing to do is just go
to developer.apple.com/webapps
and look for these titles.
So we have the iPhone Web Content Guide,
and also the Dash Code User Guide,
which provides a tutorial of
creating an iPhone web application.
It goes more in-depth than what
we had time for here today.
And also, the iPhone Developer site,
which has all your
information about native apps,
including that class I mentioned,
UI WebView,
that's at developer.apple.com/iphone.